Let's know more into one of the most important topics in programming which is exception handling will
discuss about different things related to exception handling.
We'll talk about why the exception handling is important and different things technical things in the
world in Exception handling with Java so things like finally try a little package and those kind of
things will also look at the hierarchy of the Exception handling classes.
So we'll talk about error exception check exception and check the exception rules and things like that.
We'll also discuss about how do you create a custom exception and also we'll talk about a couple of
new features which are introduced into Java or try with resources and we'll end this section by talking
about exception handling best practices.
So why is exception handling really important thing is lot of applications are large and complex and
even for smaller applications.
I've not really seen an application without defects defects and exceptions are quite common and they
happen every minute every day.
It's not really that bad programmers are the ones who create defects and exceptions not you in good
programmers write code that might have defects and that also came through exceptions.
So what are the important things about exception handling.
The thing about exception handling is there are two different parts to it.
For me the first one is giving a proper message to the user where the user or the application whenever
an exception happens.
You give him a proper message you give him a message saying OK does an exception happen if you want
to find out more.
Talk to the tech support or something of that kind.
One of the good practices that we follow is to give a unique identifier to the exception we tell the
user to say contact tech support with this specific unique identifier.
The other important part is to have enough information for your support team or disapprove of a bird
to debug the problem.
So these are two important but the first one is a friendly message the user.
The second one is N.F. information for the subadult to put to debug the problem.
So what do we mean by enough information.
We mean a proper stack trace a proper explanation of what context this application happened in and also
log the unique identifier which was given to the user in the logs so that somebody can search for it
in the log and find out that a unique identifier and get all the information about.
Exception do things that are really important about exception handling is giving a proper message to
the user and making sure that there is enough information available for the support up or support them
to fix the problem or to identify what is the root cause of this particular problem.
Exception handling in all languages in most of the languages follows a specific design pattern the design
pattern which is talked about is Chain of Responsibility.
So for example look at it in here.
So a main method is calling method one method one is calling method and method through is throwing an
exception as theoretical denial is just or two string.
Obviously it throws an exception.
So it would be handled in Java is that this method too strong an exception.
Is this called from.
This is called from methedrine.
That is not right Gach inmate.
So it does not know how to handle the exception which is thrown.
So what it does do.
What does it do.
It says OK I don't know how to handle this method one you are calling me.
So you try and handle this method one sees.
Method 2 is called here.
Do I have a try catch block.
No I don't know how to handle these exceptions so I need to return it back to the calling method.
It goes back to main means says OK we have it right.
No I don't have it right.
I don't know how to handle this so I'll throw it out.
So what would happen is this will be the output you'd see the output seen exception in method and you'd
see the complete stack trace.
You are saying that OK main method is starting from the first line submitted to is the one which is
throwing it.
You can see which line off the code which is throwing and then it went to method 1 and then it went
to main.
And so you can see the entire stack trace which resulted in this exception when we do something called
Eat or print directories.
This flow of exception from one method to the calling method is called.
It's one of the things which are defined in the chain of responsibility pattern.
So basically chain of responsibility pattern is a veil of parsing a request between a chain of objects.
So here method is one of the things in the chain method one is one of the things in the chain is the
last thing in the chain.
So whenever an exception is thrown what we are doing is a method to do know how to handle this method
one do you know how to handle this.
I mean do you know how to handle this.
So that's kind of the message passing which happens.
And in this specific example there's no exception different anyway.
So it is thrown out.
A good example of the Chain of Responsibility pattern is like a loan or leave approval process.
Let's take a loan approval process.
First it goes to the clerk.
So if the amount requested is higher than what he can approve it goes to his manager.
Probably if it's good that even his approval limits it would probably go to his director and so on so
forth until it's approved or rejected.
Same is the case with the exception handling and this pattern is called Chain of Responsibility pattern.
What does the need for the finally block you are handling an exception.
So there's a try catch block with the exception handling and you're logging the exception you're printing
the exception to the trace.
Why do you need.
Finally what is the role that finally plays in a try catch block.
That's the question.
So for example look at this matter.
What does this method do.
So we are putting a connection we are calling connections not open so the connection is open and we
are doing a little bit of logic in there here.
We had coded up an exception so this exception to this would cause an exception to be thrown and we
have taken or close called right after this.
So what happened when the exception is thrown will not close get exudate the connection that closed
will not be dead because this led through an exception.
So we would directly go into the catch block and the like we let say I'm in really well implemented
code this would be the logging it to a log or printing the stack trace or something of that kind.
So we go to the cache block and go out.
So the connection which is opened is not really closed so the connection is leaked and that's a problem.
So that's where the finally block comes in.
So what we do is instead of doing connection that closed directly in the right what we would do is we
would move it.
Finally what would happen is when an exception is thrown or not the connection or close would be called
and the connection will be lost.
So finally is basically used to do you any cleanup that you'd want to do whether an exception occurred
or not.
So the great thing about finally is that it will be exudate irrespective of whether an exception occurred
If you write the code down here somewhere down here then what would happen if an exception happens.
That code is not executed.
So that's basically when you use.
Finally we were discussing that finally is always executed whether an exception is thrown or not.
So what are the chances.
I mean what are the scenarios where it finally is not executed.
Basically there are two scenarios so let's see if I have 10 lines and finally and the second line and
finally also throws an exception.
So the there's an exception inside the finally block itself.
Then the rest of the lines and finally are not executed or the JVM crashes so let's say it's crashing
with an out-of-memory exception or something of that kind.
In that kind of a scenario also you're finally will not be executed.
You'll get this program below will finally be executed in this program.
I mean the trick is there's a done here.
So in the Gach what we are doing is systems that are Darcs Trindle and being written.
So we'll finally get executed.
The answer is yes finally gets executed and the connection gets lost even if there's a written statement
is privatised or catch allowed.
Yes it is.
So you can see there's a try and there's just a Finally there's no catch in here.
So that's allowed a great without a catch.
And finally so attrite without catch and without fine leads not really a lot.
So you should either have a catch order finally or have bought you cannot have a right without having
either of a catch or a final.